Orchestrating Cloud Events Meetup Blog Post (#2882)
knative/docs: blog/articles/orchestrating-cloud-events-with.md

> # Orchestrating Cloud Events (with Knative and Zeebe)

Reviewer: Blog posts need hugo metadata at the start of the file. See one of the other blog posts

Here are the guidelines for blog posts https://github.com/knative/docs/tree/master/blog#blog-guidelines

Reviewer 2: maybe instead of `Cloud Events`, write `CloudEvents`

Author: @lionelvillard done! thanks for the suggestion

The application that I built consists of four microservices that use [Cloud Events](https://cloudevents.io/) to communicate and perform the typical (happy path) flow of the application: **“Buy Concert Tickets”**. Each service runs as Knative Service using Knative Eventing for exchanging messages with other services.

![Knative Application](https://github.com/salaboy/orchestrating-cloud-events/blob/master/imgs/tickets-service-knative.png?raw=true)

The application heavily relies on Knative Eventing as all the services emit events to the broker and register [Knative Triggers (Subscriptions)](https://github.com/salaboy/customer-waiting-room-app/blob/master/charts/customer-waiting-room-app/templates/ktriggers.yaml#L1) to the events that they are interested in.

The following events are being emitted by the application for every single user who wants to buy tickets on our website:

![Application Events](https://github.com/salaboy/orchestrating-cloud-events/blob/master/imgs/tickets-events.png?raw=true)

> > Note that this Cloud-Native application uses [WebSockets](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebSocket#:~:text=WebSocket%20is%20a%20computer%20communications,being%20standardized%20by%20the%20W3C.), which adds an extra layer of complexity when you think about scaling it.

Reviewer 2: nit: Cloud-Native -> Cloud Native

Author: @lionelvillard done!

Even if you have tracing (with something like [OpenTracing](https://opentracing.io) and a centralized logging system, understanding what is going on inside your event-driven applications is quite tricky. Think about it like this -- lets say we have only 10 customers trying to buy tickets at once, understanding where each customer is in the process, or where potential bottlenecks are appearing is challenging.

> Until this point, this is just a normal Knative application and, because you are using Knative Eventing which natively supports Cloud Events, you can integrate more tools to the ecosystem as you will see in the next section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Until this point, this is just a normal Knative application, since you are using Knative Eventing which natively supports Cloud Events, you can integrate more tools to the ecosystem as you will see in the next section.
```

Maybe "since" instead of and, because. It reads a little bit better, but I can also see where the "and" would read alright.

Author: @mpetason up to you.. really.. both work fine for me..

![Workflow Model V3 in Operate](https://github.com/salaboy/orchestrating-cloud-events/blob/master/imgs/tickets-v3-operate-stage.png?raw=true)

Another advantage of using a workflow engine is flow control. By using Flow Control elements such as Exclusive Gateways, you can delegate some high-level decisions (usually encoding business logic) to the workflow engine:

![Workfloe Model V4](https://github.com/salaboy/orchestrating-cloud-events/blob/master/imgs/tickets-v4.png?raw=true)

As you can see in the above model, the exclusive gateway is being used to choose between two different paths based on a condition. In this case, the condition is evaluating how many tickets are being reserved by the customer and, based on that, the model is choosing between a normal credit card payment or a more complex money transfer.

## Architecture & Next Steps

From an architectural perspective, the integration between the Workflow Engine and Knative is quite simple. It relies on **Cloud Events** and a component that is in charge to route the events to the right workflows, and the other way around.

> The [Zeebe Cloud Events Router](https://github.com/zeebe-io/zeebe-cloud-events-router) is in charge of exposing an endpoint where events can be forwarded and, at the same time, understand where to push events if workflow models are emitting events.

Reviewer 2: I suppose you mean "push events **when** workflow models ...", not if.

Author: @lionelvillard ok.. I've rephrased it.. thanks.. I think that it is much clear now.

---
title: Orchestrating CloudEvents (with Knative and Zeebe)
linkTitle: Orchestrating CloudEvents
author: "[Mauricio Salatino "Salaboy"](https://twitter.com/salaboy), Principal Software Engineer @ [Camunda](http://camunda.com) and [LearnK8s](http://learnk8s.io) Instructor."
date: 2020-10-10
description: Knative Eventing and Workflow Engine Integration for gaining visibility, decoration and orchestration scenarios.
type: "blog"
---

> A couple of weeks ago, I presented at the **Knative Meetup** ([Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vOSsHp-6gto), [Slides](https://www.slideshare.net/salaboy/orchestrating-cloud-events-knative-meetup-2020)) about how you can leverage the Cloud Native workflow engine [Zeebe](http://zeebe.io) to understand, enhance and orchestrate your applications that are already using [CloudEvents](https://cloudevents.io).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A couple of weeks ago, I presented at the **Knative Meetup** ([Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=msDDdqmyEFA&list=PLQjzPfIiEQLIEpoCPxBYAVrjqy6LxLtQ8), [Slides](https://www.slideshare.net/salaboy/orchestrating-cloud-events-knative-meetup-2020)) about how you can leverage the Cloud Native workflow engine [Zeebe](http://zeebe.io) to understand, enhance and orchestrate your applications that are already using [CloudEvents](https://cloudevents.io).
```

For each customer that joins the queue to buy tickets, a new workflow instance is created to keep track of them. Having these instances allows you to track individual customers and quickly understand where everyone is at a given point in time.

![workflow model instances](https://github.com/salaboy/orchestrating-cloud-events/blob/master/imgs/tickets-v1-operate-1.png?raw=true)

Zeebe comes with Camunda Operate, which allows you to see all this information in almost real-time and have a detailed audit trail about the workflow execution and the data associated with it.

![Operate UI](https://github.com/salaboy/orchestrating-cloud-events/blob/master/imgs/tickets-v1-operate-2.png?raw=true)

## Decorate / Enhance

Now that you have the power of a workflow engine, you can leverage some of its features to decorate or enhance your applications. An ehnchanced version of the workflow model could look like this:

![Workflow model v2](https://github.com/salaboy/orchestrating-cloud-events/blob/master/imgs/tickets-v2.png?raw=true)

> Now when the customer reaches the **Payment Sent** state, meaning that they have already made a reservation, the model wait for the **Payment Sent** CloudEvent to arrive.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now when the customer reaches the **Payment Sent** state, meaning that they have already made a reservation, the model waits for the **Payment Sent** CloudEvent to arrive.
```

![timers](https://github.com/salaboy/orchestrating-cloud-events/blob/master/imgs/tickets-v2-timers.png?raw=true)

> As you can see above, two timer boundary events have been associated with the **Payment Sent** state. The bottom one, with dashed lines, is a non-interrupting event, meaning that it will not disrupt the actual flow, it will be just triggered in a fire-and-forget fashion. This result in the Payment Reminder being sent and, because it can be configured as a recurring timer, it will trigger every X amount of time (for the presentation this was set to 10 seconds).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As you can see above, two timer boundary events have been associated with the **Payment Sent** state. The bottom one, with dashed lines, is a non-interrupting event, meaning that it will not disrupt the actual flow, it will be just triggered in a fire-and-forget fashion. This results in the Payment Reminder being sent and, because it can be configured as a recurring timer, it will trigger every X amount of time (for the presentation this was set to 10 seconds).
```

![Websockets push notification](https://github.com/salaboy/orchestrating-cloud-events/blob/master/imgs/tickets-push-notification-websocket.png?raw=true)

The above image shows the notification on the frontend, which was generated by the workflow engine, routed to the website backend and forwarded using WebSockets to the website frontend in the customer browser.

> The top one, with solid lines, is an interrupting event, meaning that it will cause the normal flow of the model to be discarded and continue only to the steps defined from the timer, in this case, **Reservation Time Out**. For this scenario, the interrupting timer is set to be triggered after X amount (for the presentation this was set to 2 minutes) of time after the reservation of the tickets was made. After the reservation time out the website redirects the customer back to the beginning.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The top one, with solid lines, is an interrupting event, meaning that it will cause the normal flow of the model to be discarded and continue only to the steps defined from the timer (in this case, **Reservation Time Out**). For this scenario, the interrupting timer is set to be triggered after X amount of time after the tickets' reservation was made (for the presentation, this was set to 2 minutes). After the reservation times out, the website redirects the customer back to the beginning.
```

> For both timers, you get full traceability (e.g. when and how oftenthey were triggered). You can see these details graphically in **Operate**:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For both timers, you get full traceability (e.g. when and how often they were triggered). You can see these details graphically in **Operate**:
```

![Workflow model v2 in Operate](https://github.com/salaboy/orchestrating-cloud-events/blob/master/imgs/tickets-v2-timers-operate.png?raw=true)

> You can see that the non-interrupting timer was triggered several times, generating payment reminders in the frontend. Even if we don’t implement the frontend notifications, you can use these timers to measure and classify how much time it actually takes your customer to make the payment. This can be really useful to classify different categories, for example, how much time it takes, on average, for people to provide payment details.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can see that the non-interrupting timer was triggered several times, generating payment reminders in the frontend. Even if we don’t implement the frontend notifications, you can use these timers to measure and classify how much time it actually takes your customer to make the payment. This can be really useful to classify different categories; for example, how much time it takes, on average, for people to provide payment details.
```

A big difference between these timers and [Cronjobs (for example in Kubernetes)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/cron-jobs/) is that these timers are contextual to the state that they are associated with, meaning that as soon as the **Payment Sent** CloudEvent is received, both timers are automatically cancelled and garbage collected. For this particular scenario, you want notifications about the payment to be sent but also make sure the reservation doesn’t time out if the payment was sent. The workflow engine deals with these very common requirements in a transparent way for the user who is interested in registering time-based events as part of their applications.

## Orchestrate

> The **Payment Reminder** and **Reservation Time Out** states, shown in the model above, represent when we cross the line from simply listening to events to actually emitting CloudEvents from a workflow model. Now the workflow model is not only helping you to visualize and understand what your Cloud Native applications are doing but driving and interacting with your services.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The **Payment Reminder** and **Reservation Time Out** status, shown in the model above, represent when we cross the line from simply listening to events to actually emitting CloudEvents from a workflow model. Now the workflow model is not only helping you to visualize and understand what your Cloud Native applications are doing but driving and interacting with your services.
```

> The **Payment Reminder** and **Reservation Time Out** states, shown in the model above, represent when we cross the line from simply listening to events to actually emitting CloudEvents from a workflow model. Now the workflow model is not only helping you to visualize and understand what your Cloud Native applications are doing but driving and interacting with your services.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The **Payment Reminder** and **Reservation Time Out** states, shown in the model below, represent when we cross the line from simply listening to events to actually emitting CloudEvents from a workflow model. Now the workflow model is not only helping you to visualize and understand what your Cloud Native applications are doing but driving and interacting with your services.
```

Reviewer 4: adding as a separate revision because I am not sure if you want to commit this change. I noticed you can see these status in both the model above, and the one right below this paragraph, so up to you.

Author: I am ok with the one above

While using a workflow engine to orchestrate CloudEvents, you have a bunch of new tools at your fingertips to deal with more complex scenarios.

Version 3 of the Workflow Model shows a more complex diagram, where a subprocess can be used to group a set of states together. By doing so, you can quickly identify stages inside your workflows, as well as register events for these stages such as timers or message events.

![Workflow Model V3](https://github.com/salaboy/orchestrating-cloud-events/blob/master/imgs/tickets-v3.png?raw=true)

The worfklow can react on the CloudEvent **Customer Abandoned Queue** at any given time inside the **Customer Buying Tickets** stage. This will trigger the Customer **Clean Up** event to garbage collect all the data related with the Customer Session from all the services caching data.

> In the following screenshot you can see how inside Camunda Operate, you can quickly visualize how many instances of the workflows are at a given stage as well as how many workflows have finished, and in which state they finished:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the following screenshot, inside Camunda Operate, you can quickly visualize how many instances of the workflows are at a given stage as well as how many workflows have finished, and in which state they finished:
```

![Workflow Model V3 in Operate](https://github.com/salaboy/orchestrating-cloud-events/blob/master/imgs/tickets-v3-operate-stage.png?raw=true)

> Another advantage of using a workflow engine is flow control. By using Flow Control elements such as Exclusive Gateways, you can delegate some high-level decisions (usually encoding business logic) to the workflow engine:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Another advantage of using a workflow engine is flow control. By using flow control elements such as Exclusive Gateways, you can delegate some high-level decisions (usually encoding business logic) to the workflow engine:
```

Reviewer 4: capitalize every time, or don't capitalize.

---
apiVersion: eventing.knative.dev/v1
kind: Trigger
metadata:
  name: router-tickets-payment-authorized-trigger
  namespace: default
spec:
  broker: default
  filter:
    attributes:
      type: Tickets.PaymentsAuthorized
  subscriber:
    uri: http://zeebe-cloud-events-router.default.svc.cluster.local/message
```
As mentioned before, further integrations should deal with more advanced topologies at the messaging layer. For example, being able to logically group workflow models to use a dedicated [Knative Channel](https://knative.dev/docs/eventing/channels/) and [Zeebe CloudEvents Router](https://github.com/zeebe-io/zeebe-cloud-events-router). In future releases, the Zeebe Operator will be aware of the CloudEvents Router to provision and manage the Knative and CloudEvents integration.

## Sum up

In this blog post, I’ve spent some time describing the wonders of what you can do with a Workflow Engine like Zeebe on top of Knative Applications. I’ve personally had a lot of fun while working with Knative, as the abstractions provided helped me to build a very robust application that I can move to different cloud providers easily, without changing any of my services.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Watch this demo live here: 
{{< youtube msDDdqmyEFA >}}
```
